== Introduction ==

Scuba doesn't really know the difference between an anatomical volume
and a segmentation volume, it just knows that it displays one in
grayscale and the other with a lookup table (LUT) of colors. However,
contextually, there are some instances when a segmentation volume is
needed and an anatomical volume is inappropriate. So, scuba will guess
that any volume that is being displayed with a Grayscale color map is
an anatomical volume, and any that is displayed with an LUT color map
is a segmentation. This can be done in the Layer panel.

== Creating a New Segmentation ==

To create a new segmentation volume, you need to first load the
anatomical volume so scuba can use it as a template. Make sure you
have the anatomical volume selected in the Data panel (if you only
have one volume loaded, this is automatic) and then choose File->New
Volume... from the menu bar. Confirm that it will create the volume
using your anatomical volume as the template.

You can name the volume in the Data panel. The default name will be
"New Volume"; you can change this by typing a new name into the
editable text field below the pull-down menu in the Data panel.

In the Layer panel, select the New Volume layer and rename it to
something appropriate, perhaps matching the volume name you just
set. Now click on the LUT button to make scuba draw this with an LUT
color map. You will probably want to click on the "Draw 0 values
clear" checkbox to make the non-labeled values 'transparent'.

Make sure the segmentation volume is drawn 'on top' of the anatomical
volume: in the Views panel, put the anatomical volume in Draw Level 0
and the segmentation in Draw Level 1. This is normally the default.

== Brushing ==

Now you are ready to edit your segmentation. Since a segmentation is
just a volume with values like an anatomical volume, you use the
volume editing tool to do this. "Labeling a voxel" is really just
changing the value of that voxel to match the value of the structure
in the LUT you're using. An "unlabeled voxel" is just a voxel with a
value of 0, the 'unknown' structure, that is being drawn
transparently.

In the Tools panel, make sure the segmentation volume is the Target
Layer. Use the Voxel Editing tool to made edits in the segmentation
volume. You can use the pull-down menu at the bottom of the Tools
panel (visible when the Voxel Editing tool is selected) to choose an
LUT and choose a new value from the list of structures. Experiment
with the "Only brush zero values" option to avoid editing already
labeled values.

== Filling ==

You may also want to try filling regions in the segmentation volume
based on the anatomical volume. Set the Fill Source Data to the
anatomical volume. Set the Fill Fuzziness value to something decent;
for a T1 volume, try 3 or 4. Set the Fill Max Distance to something
safe like 10 (assuming this is a volume with ~1mm voxel size). Set the
Fuzziness Type to Seed. Uncheck the "Work in 3D" checkbox so we are
only editing the slice that we see. Make sure that the New Value is
not 0 so that you're actually labeling voxels. Now shift-click with
the middle mouse button inside an anatomical structure with an area of
contiguous voxels that have about the same value. You should see the
segmentation volume filled with the new value.

You can also shift-click with the right button to do an erasing
fill. Again, this is the same as filling with value 0.

== Paths ==

You may also experiment with paths to create borders for your
fills. Use the Straight Path tool to draw paths and the "Stop at
paths" checkbox in the Fill Options to keep your fill from crossing a
path.

== Histogram Fill ==

You may also fill based on a histogram of the anatomical volume. From
the Tools menu, choose Histogram Fill... Select your anatomical volume
and segmentation volumes, and if you have a ROI to use, select
that. The ROI should be in the anatomical volume. If you use an ROI,
the histogram and fill area will be limited to that ROI, otherwise it
will affect the entire visible area.

You should see a histogram of the anatomical volume. You can click and
drag with the left button in the histogram area to select a range of
values. You'll see a new row appear below the histogram with the
values you selected. In the menu on the right, choose a structure to
assign to this value range. You can move regions around by clicking on
the bar in the histogram with the middle button, or delete them by
clicking on it with the right button. When you are done assigning
ranges, click the OK button to perform the fill.
